Add TiDB v5.4 release notes (#7430)
pingcap/docs: releases/release-5.4.0.md

---
title: TiDB 5.4 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 5.4 Release Notes

Release date：February xx, 2022

TiDB version: 5.4.0

In v5.4, the key new features or improvements are as follows:

- Support the GBK character set
- Support using Index Merge to access data, which merges the filtering results of indexes on multiple columns
- Support reading stale data using a session variable
- Support persisting the configuration for collecting statistics
- Optimize the impact of backup on the cluster

> - Support using Azure Blob storage as the target storage for backup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support using Azure Blob storage as the backup storage
```

    Since v5.4.0, TiDB supports persisting some `ANALYZE` configurations. With this feature, the existing configurations can be easily reused for future statistics collection.

    The `ANALYZE` configuration persistence feature is enabled by default (the system variable `tidb_analyze_version` is `2` and `tidb_persist_analyze_options` is `ON` by default). You can use this feature to record the persistence configurations specified in the `ANALYZE` statement when executing the statement manually. Once recorded, the next time TiDB automatically updates statistics or you manually collect statistics without specifying these configurations, TiDB will collect statistics according to the recorded configurations.

    [User document](/statistics.md#persist-analyze-configurations)

## High availability and disaster recovery

- **Reduce the impact of backup tasks on the cluster**

>     Backup & Restore (BR) introduces the auto-tune feature (enabled by default). This feature can reduce the impact of backup tasks on the cluster by monitoring the cluster resource usage and adjusting the number of threads used by the backup tasks. In some cases, if you increase the cluster resource usage for backup and enable the auto-tune feature, it is possible to limit the impact of backup tasks on the cluster to 10% or less.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Backup & Restore (BR) introduces the auto-tune feature (enabled by default). This feature can reduce the impact of backup tasks on the cluster by monitoring the cluster resource usage and adjusting the number of threads used by the backup tasks. In some cases, if you increase the cluster hardware resource for backup and enable the auto-tune feature, it can limit the impact of backup tasks on the cluster to 10% or less.
```

   [User document](/br/br-auto-tune.md)

- **Support Azure Blob Storage as a target storage for backup**

>    Backup & Restore (BR) supports Azure Blob Storage as a remote target storage for backup tasks. If you deploy TiDB in Azure Cloud, you can back up the cluster data to the Azure Blob Storage service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Backup & Restore (BR) supports Azure Blob Storage as a remote backup storage. If you deploy TiDB in Azure Cloud, now you can back up the cluster data to the Azure Blob Storage service.
```

  [User document](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task)

- **TiDB Lightning introduces duplicate resolution**

    In Local-backend mode, TiDB Lightning outputs duplicated data before the data import is completed, and then removes that duplicated data from the database. You can resolve the duplicated data after the import is completed and select suitable data to insert according to application rules. It is recommended to clean upstream data sources based on duplicated data to avoid data inconsistency caused by duplicated data encountered in the subsequent incremental data migration phase.

    [User document](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-error-resolution.md)

- **Optimize the usage of relay log in TiDB Data Migration (DM)**

    - Recover the `enable-relay` switch in the `source` configuration.

>     - Support dynamically enabling or disabling relay log in the `start-relay` or `stop-relay` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Support dynamically enabling and disabling relay log with `start-relay` and `stop-relay` command.
```

---
title: TiDB 5.4 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 5.4 Release Notes

Release date：February xx, 2022

TiDB version: 5.4.0

In v5.4, the key new features or improvements are as follows:

- Support the GBK character set
- Support using Index Merge to access data, which merges the filtering results of indexes on multiple columns
- Support reading stale data using a session variable
- Support persisting the configuration for collecting statistics
- Support using Raft Engine as the log storage engine of TiKV (experimental)
- Optimize the impact of backup on the cluster
- Support using Azure Blob storage as the target storage for backup
- Continuouly improve the stability and performance of TiFlash and the MPP engine
- Add a switch in TiDB Lightning to determine whether to allow importing an existing table
- Optimize the Continuous Profiling feature (experimental)
- TiSpark supports user identification and authentication

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>

> > When upgrading from an earlier TiDB version to v5.3.0, if you want to know the compatibility change notes of all intermediate versions, you can check the [Release Notes](/releases/release-notes.md) of the corresponding version.

Author: ```suggestion
> When upgrading from an earlier TiDB version to v5.4.0, if you want to know the compatibility change notes of all intermediate versions, you can check the [Release Notes](/releases/release-notes.md) of the corresponding version.
```

    For the business scenarios that do not require high real-time performance, the expired read mode can be used. This mode can reduce latency and improve throughput. TiDB currently supports the expired read by displaying read-only transactions or SQL statements. Both methods support reading the historical data of a specific point in time or within a specified time range. For details, please refer to [Read Historical Data through session variable `tidb_snapshot`](/read-historical-data.md).

    Since v5.4.0, TiDB supports reading historical data within a specified time range a through session variable, which further improves usability, reduces the difficulty of development, and meets the business requirements of low latency and high throughput of data access in quasi-real-time scenarios. You can set the variable as following example:

    ```sql
    set @@tidb_replica_read=leader_and_follower
    set @@tidb_read_staleness="-5"
    ```

    By this setting, TiDB can select the nearest leader or follower node and read the latest historical data within 5 seconds.

    [User document](/read-historical-data.md)

- **GA for Index Merge**

>     _Index Merge_ is introduced in TiDB v4.0 an experimental feature to access tables. This method greatly accelerates condition filtering when a query requires scanning of multiple columns of data. Take the following query as an example. In the `WHERE` statement, the filtering conditions connected by `OR` have their respective indexes in columns _key1_ and _key2_. Based on the indexes in the two columns, the Index Merge feature filters and merges the query results, and returns the merged result.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    _Index Merge_ is introduced in TiDB v4.0 as an experimental feature to access tables. This method greatly accelerates condition filtering when a query requires scanning of multiple columns of data. Take the following query as an example. In the `WHERE` statement, the filtering conditions connected by `OR` have their respective indexes in columns _key1_ and _key2_. Based on the indexes in the two columns, the Index Merge feature filters and merges the query results, and returns the merged result.
```

- **DM OpenAPI becomes generally available (GA)**

    DM supports daily management via API, including adding data sources and managing tasks. In v5.4.0, DM OpenAPI becomes GA.

    [User document](/dm/dm-open-api.md)

### Diagnostic efficiency

- **Top SQL (experimental feature)**

    A new experimental feature, Top SQL (turned off by default), is introduced to help you easily find queries that consume more resources.

    [User document](/dashboard/top-sql.md)

### TiDB data share subscription

- **Optimize the impact of TiCDC on clusters**

    Significantly reduces the performance impact on TiDB clusters when you use TiCDC. In the test environment, the performance impact of TiCDC on TiDB can be reduced to less than 5%.

### Deployment and maintenance

- **Enhance Continuous Profiling (experimental feature)**

    - More components supported: Besides TiDB, PD, and TiKV, TiDB v5.4.0 also supports CPU profiling of TiFlash.

>     - More forms of profiling display: Supports display of CPU Profiling and Goroutine results on flame charts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - More forms of profiling display: Supports display of CPU profiling and Goroutine results on flame charts.
```

>     - More deployment environments supported: You can enable Continuous Profiling on clusters deployed using TiDB Operator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - More deployment environments supported: Continuous Profiling is applicable to clusters deployed using TiDB Operator.
```

    Continuous Profiling is disabled by default and can be enabled on TiDB Dashboard. 

>     Continuous Profiling is available for clusters deployed or upgraded using TiUP of v1.9.0 or later or TiDB Operator of v1.3.0 or later.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Continuous Profiling is available to clusters deployed or upgraded using TiUP of v1.9.0 or later or TiDB Operator of v1.3.0 or later.
```

    When using the GBK character set, you need to pay attention to the compatibility restrictions. For details, see [Character Set and Collation - GBK](/character-set-gbk.md).

### Security

- **TiSpark supports user authentication and authorization**

    Since TiSpark 2.5.0, TiSpark supports both database user authentication and read/write authorization at a database or table level. After enabling this feature, you can prevent the business from running unauthorized batch tasks such as draws to obtain data, which improves the stability and data security of online clusters.

    This feature is disabled by default. When it is enabled, if a user operating through TiSpark does not have the needed permissions, the user gets an exception from TiSpark.

    [User document](/tispark-overview.md#security)

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

- **TiUP support for generating an initial password for the root user**

    An `--init` parameter is introduced to the command for starting a cluster. With this parameter, in a TiDB cluster deployed using TiUP, an initial password is generated for the database root user. This avoids security risks in using a root user with an empty password and ensures the security of databases.

```

    - Coprocessor supports pushing down substring to TiKV [#11495](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11495)
    - Improve the scan performance by skip reading locks in the Read Committed isolation level [#11485](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11485)
    - Reduce the default thread pool size used by backup operations and limit the use of thread pool when the stress is high [#11000](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11000)
    - Support dynamically adjusting the sizes of the Apply thread pool and the Store thread pool [#11159](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11159)
    - Support configuring the size of the `snap-generator` thread pool [#11247](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11247)
    - Optimize the issue of global lock race that occurs when there are many files with frequent reads and writes [#250](https://github.com/tikv/rocksdb/pull/250)

+ PD

    - Record the historic hotspot information by default [#25281](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/25281)
    - Add signature for the HTTP component to identify the request source [#4490](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/4490)

>     - Update TiDB Dashboard to v2021.12.31 [#4257](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/4257)

Reviewer 4: Can we link to release notes or otherwise list the major improvements since the last version?

---
title: TiDB 5.4 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 5.4 Release Notes

> Release date：February xx, 2022

Author: ```suggestion
Release date：February 15, 2022
```

TiDB version: 5.4.0

In v5.4, the key new features or improvements are as follows:

- Support the GBK character set
- Support using Index Merge to access data, which merges the filtering results of indexes on multiple columns
- Support reading stale data using a session variable
- Support persisting the configuration for collecting statistics
- Support using Raft Engine as the log storage engine of TiKV (experimental)
- Optimize the impact of backup on the cluster
- Support using Azure Blob storage as the backup storage
- Continuously improve the stability and performance of TiFlash and the MPP engine
- Add a switch in TiDB Lightning to determine whether to allow importing to an existing table with data
- Optimize the Continuous Profiling feature (experimental)
- TiSpark supports user identification and authentication

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>

> > When upgrading from an earlier TiDB version to v5.3.0, if you want to know the compatibility change notes of all intermediate versions, you can check the [Release Notes](/releases/release-notes.md) of the corresponding version.

Author: ```suggestion
> When upgrading from an earlier TiDB version to v5.4.0, if you want to know the compatibility change notes of all intermediate versions, you can check the [Release Notes](/releases/release-notes.md) of the corresponding version.
```

| [`tidb_store_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_limit-new-in-v304-and-v40) | Modified | Before v5.4.0, this variable can be configured at instance level and globally. Starting from v5.4.0, this variable only supports global configuration. |

### Configuration file parameters

|  Configuration file    |  Configuration |  Change type  | Description    |
| :---------- | :----------- | :----------- | :----------- |
| TiDB | [`stats-load-concurrency`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-load-concurrency-new-in-v540) | Newly added |  Controls the maximum number of columns that the TiDB synchronously loading statistics feature can process concurrently. The default value is `5`.  |
| TiDB | [`stats-load-queue-size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-load-queue-size-new-in-v540)   | Newly added |  Controls the maximum number of column requests that the TiDB synchronously loading statistics feature can cache. The default value is`1000`.  |

> | TiKV | [`snap-generator-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#snap-generator-pool-size-new-in-v540) | Newly added | The size of `snap-generator` thread pool. The default value is `2`. |

Author: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`snap-generator-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#snap-generator-pool-size-new-in-v540) | Newly added | The size of the `snap-generator` thread pool. The default value is `2`. |
```

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM table WHERE key1 <= 100 OR key2 = 200;
    ```

    Before TiDB v4.0, a query on a table supports using only one index for filtering at one time. If you want to query multiple columns of data, you can enable Index Merge to get the exact query result in a short time by using the indexes in individual columns. Index Merge avoids unnecessary full table scans and does not require establishing a large number of composite indexes.

    In v5.4.0, Inex Merge becomes  GA. However, you still need to pay attention to the following restrictions:

    - Index Merge supports only disjunctive normal form (X<sub>1</sub> ⋁ X<sub>2</sub> ⋁ …X<sub>n</sub>). That is, this feature only works when filtering conditions in a `WHERE` clause are connected by `OR`.

    - For newly deployed TiDB clusters of v5.4.0 or later,  this feature is enabled by default. For v5.4.0 or later TiDB clusters upgraded from earlier versions, this feature inherits the setting before the upgrade and you can change the setting as required (for TiDB clusters earlier than v4.0, this feature does not exist and is disabled by default).

    [User document](/explain-index-merge.md)

> - **Add Raft Engine (experimental)**

Author: ```suggestion
- **Support Raft Engine (experimental)**
```

| [`tidb_enable_top_sql`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_top_sql-new-in-v540) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the Top SQL feature. The default value is `OFF`. |
| [`tidb_persist_analyze_options`](/system-variables.md#tidb_persist_analyze_options-new-in-v540) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the [ANALYZE configuration persistence](/statistics.md#persist-analyze-configurations) feature. The default value is `OFF`. |
| [`tidb_read_staleness`](/system-variables.md#tidb_read_staleness-new-in-v540) | Newly added | Controls the range of historical data that can be read in the current session. The default value is `0`.|

> | [`tidb_regard_null_as_point `](/system-variables.md#tidb_regard_null_as_point-new-in-v540) | Newly added | Controls whether the optimizer can treat `null` as a point value and uses it as a prefix condition to access the index. |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_regard_null_as_point `](/system-variables.md#tidb_regard_null_as_point-new-in-v540) | Newly added | Controls whether the optimizer can use a query condition including null equivalence as a prefix condition for index access. |
```

    When using the GBK character set, you need to pay attention to the compatibility restrictions. For details, see [Character Set and Collation - GBK](/character-set-gbk.md).

### Security

- **TiSpark supports user authentication and authorization**

    Since TiSpark 2.5.0, TiSpark supports both database user authentication and read/write authorization at a database or table level. After enabling this feature, you can prevent the business from running unauthorized batch tasks such as draws to obtain data, which improves the stability and data security of online clusters.

    This feature is disabled by default. When it is enabled, if a user operating through TiSpark does not have the needed permissions, the user gets an exception from TiSpark.

    [User document](/tispark-overview.md#security)

- **TiUP supports generating an initial password for the root user**

>     An `--init` parameter is introduced to the command for starting a cluster. With this parameter, in a TiDB cluster deployed using TiUP, TiUP generates an initial password for the database root user. This avoids security risks in using a root user with an empty password and ensures the security of databases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    An `--init` parameter is introduced to the command for starting a cluster. With this parameter, in a TiDB cluster deployed using TiUP, TiUP generates an initial strong password for the database root user. This avoids security risks in using a root user with an empty password and ensures the security of databases.
```

>     [User document](/production-deployment-using-tiup.md##step-7-start-the-tidb-cluster)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    [User document](/production-deployment-using-tiup.md#step-7-start-the-tidb-cluster)
```

- TiDB Server, PD Server, and TiKV Server start using a unified naming method for the log-related parameters to manage log names, output formats, and the rules for rotation and expiration. For details, see [TiKV configuration file - log](/tikv-configuration-file.md#log-new-in-v540).
- Since v5.4.0, if you create a SQL binding for an execution plan that has been cached via Plan Cache, the binding invalidates the plan already cached for the corresponding query. The new binding does not affect execution plans cached before v5.4.0.
- In v5.3 and earlier versions, [TiDB Data Migration (DM)](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-data-migration/v5.3/) documentation is independent of TiDB documentation. Since v5.4, DM documentation is integrated into TiDB documentation with the same version. You can directly read [DM documentation](/dm/dm-overview.md) without accessing the DM documentation site.

> - Remove the experimental feature of Point-in-time recovery (PITR) along with cdclog. Since v5.4.0, PITR and cdclog are no longer supported.

Reviewer 4: The TiCDC / cdclog based PITR isn't supported, but I think binlog / reparo ( https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tidb-binlog-reparo ) is still supported.

"Remove the experimental feature of Point-in-time recovery (PITR) along with cdclog. Since v5.4.0, cdclog based PITR and cdclog are removed."

Author: ```suggestion
- Remove the experimental feature of Point-in-time recovery (PITR) along with cdclog. Since v5.4.0, cdclog-based PITR and cdclog are no longer supported.
```
